Now that we know how to use arrays where they're fast, where they're slow.
We're going to get into a part that is not crucial for interviews, but it's good to understand how
they work and how to build an array.
Most likely in an interview you won't get asked Hey, build an array from the beginning.
But I do want to build those foundations for you so that we understand a race from a fundamental level.
So let's build an array ourselves.
Now in this video, we're going to be using the class syntax in JavaScript.
So we're going to create an array class, even though with JavaScript and many other languages we can
just do this and we've created an array.
Let's see if we can build one of our own, because as you'll find out as we go through this course,
data structures are simply things that we can build from scratch.
We can create whatever data structure we want.
We can create our own data structure.
The most common data structures are well known and are already implemented in most languages because
they are so useful.
But you are able to build any data structure you want from scratch.
And as you'll find out, most data structures are built on top of other data structures.
Now to get started, we're going to create an array in JavaScript, but just the heads up JavaScript
is a bit of an interesting case.
Arrays in JavaScript are just objects with integer based keys that act like indexes, and that's why
we're going to build different languages, will have this implementation differently.
But what we're going to learn here is still going to be applicable to how arrays work in other languages.
So we're going to start off with creating a class.
Let's start off with creating a class and we'll call this.
My array.
And within the mirror, we'll have a constructor.
Which is the initial function that will be run when we create this mirror.
And this constructor is going to have two data points.
One is the length property, because with an array, we're able to determine the length of the array,
and the initial length will be zero.
That is how many items the array has.
And then we'll obviously have the data within the array.
And this is going to be an object.
Now, what's the most common action that we have in array?
Well, it's the access to access the data.
So let's create a get method.
And this get method is going to take an index.
To actually grab the data from memory.
So I'm going to just say return this.
DOT data.
And if this keyword is confusing to you, make sure you watch the previous video.
This DOT data is just referring to this data that we've created in the constructor and we're just going
to return.
The data at the index that we are requiring.
Let's see how this would work in action.
To create a new mirror.
All we need to do is say cost new array.
And we use the new keyword in JavaScript to instantiate this or create a copy of this class.
Like this.
So now if I do console.log new.
Array.
And I click Run.
I get my array that has property length of zero and data that is empty.
If I do new array.
Dot get.
Zero.
Index of zero.
I get undefined.
Well, because there's nothing in this object.
We have no items and JavaScript automatically has the type on defined when while there's nothing.
Let's add our next method.
That is the push method to add something at the end of the array.
So I'm going to create a push method and this method we'll take in an item that we will give it.
And within here, we'll simply add this to the data of our object.
It's going to add it to the length of our item.
So because we have zero items and the length is zero, this is going to add the data at this data zero
index.
And the zero index will simply now contain the item.
And because we want to keep adding items if we wanted to, we will say this dot.
Length.
Plus plus, because now our array has a length of one instead of zero, so that next time we run the
push method, this length will be one and the new item will be added at index of one.
And let's just return this dot length for now.
Because the typical push method in JavaScript will usually return the length of the array.
Let's run this and see what happens.
I'm going to say.
That down here.
We'll we'll have new.
A red dot push.
And we're going to push.
Hi.
If I run this, I see.
I have my array length one.
Data is going to have a property zero of hi.
Nice.
What if we add another thing let's do new array dot push.
And we'll say to you if I run this I have length of to now with index of zero at high or index of zero
has high and the index of one has you.
Very cool.
What else can we do?
Well, let's add the pop command to remove the last item of the array.
Once again, we have the pop method that doesn't receive anything.
We don't need to pass that a parameter.
All we need to do is delete the last item in the array.
We can simply have a variable, let's say last item that grabs the last item in our data object.
So this is going to just simply be this data at index of length.
Minus one.
Remember, we want the index of one, even though the length is two, because we're counting zero one.
We want the last item in the data.
And from here we can just use the delete keyword in JavaScript and say this dot data.
At this dot length minus one.
Just delete that item.
And obviously we need to.
Decrease.
So just shorthand here in JavaScript to decrease the length of our data by one.
And then finally, we can just return the item that we deleted.
So now if I.
Run another command.
And by the way, you might see here that I've missed the semicolons in JavaScript.
Most of the time you can get away with not adding semicolons.
And some people don't use semicolons all in JavaScript.
Don't get too distracted by that.
Sometimes I forget, and it's not really important, at least for our purposes.
Let's add a new item to the array.
That's going to be the exclamation point and I'm going to say my or new.
A red dot pop.
If I run this.
Oh, I get an error saying item because this should be last item.
Here you go.
Let's run that again.
And we see that it's high.
You.
Because the exclamation mark has been deleted.
If I run pop again.
I see that I have length of one and only high remaining.
Very cool.
All right, let's add one last one and to show you why some operations in a race are o of.
Then we're going to add the delete method.
And the delete method is going to take an index.
Which item we want to delete?
And in here we will have to do a cost item.
So we're going to create a reference to this DOT data index, which is the item we want to delete.
And Hmm, how are we going to delete this?
Because remember in an array, we'll have to delete the item, then shift the index of all the other
data types by one.
Well, because we want to follow good coding practices using the idea of single responsibility principle.
Let's add another function that does this for us that does the shifting of data for us.
I'm going to create a new method and we do this in JavaScript using the this syntax shift.
Items.
And this method is going to take the index that we received here and the delete.
Now this shift items we can create it here and say that shift items method.
And by the way, I use the words function and methods interchangeably.
Sometimes method simply means is a function within a class.
So this this shift items will be a method of my array.
But it is a function.
So this function.
Which is a method of Myra will have the index parameter passed into it.
And this is where we do some fun things.
We're going to have to loop through the items.
So that's a four loop, which right away should ring the bell and say, Oh, this is an o of an operation,
we're going to have an index of zero or I of zero.
Actually instead of zero, remember, because we want to shift items, not all of them, just wherever
the index starts from.
We say index and now I will have to be this length so I is less than this length minus one.
And we're going to increment I by one each time through the loop.
Within this loop.
All we're going to do is say this dot data our data at.
Each index that we loop through.
Is going to equal this DOT data.
At I plus one.
Hmm.
What just happened here?
Well, we're saying start at the index that we want to start the delete from and iterate through it
all the way until the end.
And within this loop, I want you to take each item in the data that we have and instead of what it
had before, I want you to add the data that is right next to it to plus one.
So if we had an array that is zero and two, I'm saying from the index of zero over here, I want you
to now instead make zero equal to two.
So index of I plus one.
So we're shifting the.
Items to the left by one.
So we have shifted here.
All the items.
One to the left.
And because we did that, the index that we gave it for the delete automatically gets replaced because
that AI is going to get replaced.
Now there's an issue here, right?
Because now the very last item in the array.
That is this dot data at this dot length minus one, which is the last item in the array.
Well, still exists.
We've shifted everything over by one, but we've never touched the very last item because we stopped
when I.
Is less than this length minus one.
So this is still full.
So I'm going to comment this out and just show you what happens if we just leave it like this.
I'm going to run the new.
Array.
Dot delete.
And I'm going to remove the pop commands for now.
And in the delete I'm going to say I want to delete the you item.
So that's index of one.
If I run this.
I get high, you is deleted.
But then I have exclamation mark at index of one.
So the shifting is working, but at index of two I still have the exclamation mark because, well,
we never deleted it.
We've shifted everything once over, but we never touched index of two.
So all we need to do to get rid of that is the delete keyword.
To delete the last item and obviously to.
Decrement are length because we just delete an item, we can do this length, minus, minus.
If we run this now.
Hey, look at that length of too high exclamation mark.
Let's play a little round to make sure everything is working here.
If let's say I add a couple more push commands here and we'll say Here are high, you are.
And then let's say nice.
If I run this, I get high exclamation mark.
Ah.
Nice.
That doesn't make sense.
Let's change this to zero.
To remove the high.
If I run this, I get you exclamation mark.
Ah.
Nice.
Hmm.
That still doesn't make sense.
Let's remove the exclamation mark so that we only have.
You are nice.
I'm going to run the new array.
And we can delete index of one, which is the exclamation mark, and let's see what we get then.
If I run this, I get.
You are nice.
Awesome.
Now you might look at this and want to add your own methods.
You might want to, let's say in here, return the last item just as a reference, which is how it works
in JavaScript.
But I think for now you have an understanding of how arrays work and how they're implemented underneath
the hood.
We have simple of one commands which are really, really nice, but as soon as we have to start shifting.
Indexes and changing things around.
We have to loop over things which makes it o of n or linear time.
I'm going to leave this for you as a playground after this lesson so you can add your own things.
Maybe you write it in different languages and explore a little bit more into a race.
But this video is already getting long.
I don't want you to get too bored now, so I'll see you in the next video.
Bye bye.